Docs: Enhance page about build automation with github workflows (#1534)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/publish-a-plugin/build-automation.md

We recommend setting up your plugin to use the supplied [Github workflows](../get-started/set-up-development-environment.mdx#set-up-github-workflows) from [create-plugin](../get-started/get-started.mdx)
to ensure that your plugin will be built and packaged in the correct format.

Additionally, we recommend using the zip file produced from this workflow to test the plugin.

> If a Grafana Access Policy Token is included in your [Github repository secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/managing-codespaces-for-your-organization/managing-development-environment-secrets-for-your-repository-or-organization), a signed build is automatically created, which you can use to test the plugin locally before submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a Grafana Access Policy Token is included in your [Github repository secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/managing-codespaces-for-your-organization/managing-development-environment-secrets-for-your-repository-or-organization), a signed build is automatically created, which you can use to test the plugin locally before submission. The [sign a plugin](https://grafana.com/developers/plugin-tools/publish-a-plugin/sign-a-plugin#generate-an-access-policy-token) documentation includes guidance on how to create this token.
```

By creating a release tag, the whole process becomes automated, resulting in a zip file that you can submit for publication to the [Grafana plugin catalog](https://grafana.com/plugins)

You can use the links to the archive and zip files from the release page to make your plugin submission.

## Setup the release workflow

> Ensure your repository contains a `.github/workflows/release.yml` file with the following contents: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, create-plugin will add the following `release.yml` to your scaffolded plugin with the following contents. If this is missing from your plugin repository, copy the following to add the workflow: 
```
Nit - but given its the default and we are generally recommending that people use the default supplied workflow, which this is - maybe instead we can remove the note and just tweak this text a bit to clean it up

Author: it is the default but there are plenty of plugins that were scaffolded before it was. that's why I am trying to make it clear. 

But I like the idea of tweaking this text better

> Make sure you have a file named `.github/workflows/release.yml` in your repository with the following contents:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure your repository contains a `.github/workflows/release.yml` file with the following contents: 
```

```yaml title=".github/workflows/release.yml"
name: Release

on:
  push:
    tags:
      - 'v*' # Run workflow on version tags, e.g. v1.0.0.

jobs:
  release:
    permissions:
      id-token: write
      contents: write
      attestations: write
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - uses: grafana/plugin-actions/build-plugin@main
        with:
          # see https://grafana.com/developers/plugin-tools/publish-a-plugin/sign-a-plugin#generate-an-access-policy-token to generate it
          # save the value in your repository secrets
          policy_token: ${{ secrets.GRAFANA_ACCESS_POLICY_TOKEN }}
          # creates a signed build provenance attestation to verify the authenticity of the plugin build
          attestation: true
```

> :::note
> It is likely this file already exists in your repository. Verify its content and make any necessary changes to match the example.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: why delete this section?

Reviewer: https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/pull/1534#discussion_r1967260158 part of this

> :::

Reviewer 3: nit: where is the source of truth for this workflow? This doc or the template in create-plugin?

Author: create-plugin.

and in the future we want to introduce some workflows in these docs to keep them updated.

## How to trigger the release workflow

To trigger the release workflow you need to push a tag with the format `vX.X.X` to the repository. Typically all of your changes will be merged into `main`, and the tag is applied to `main`

### Create a `vX.X.X` tag with your package manager (Recommended)

The easiest way to create a version tag is using your package manager.

In the following examples a patch version (following [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/)) is created:

with [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/commands/npm-init):

```
npm version patch
```

with [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/lang/en/docs/cli/version/):

```
yarn version patch
```

with [pnpm](https://pnpm.io/):

```
pnpm version patch
```

> This updates your version in the `package.json` file and creates a new Git tag with the format `vX.X.X`. You can change `patch` to `minor` or `major` if you want to create a new minor or major version.

Reviewer: I can't remember if the dev has to update the `plugin.json` to match or if we take care of that?

Author: you have to. I removed these instructions. we prefer people to use the CLI commands.

Reviewer: @academo sorry, not sure i follow and I want to make sure I understand - which instructions have been removed? Given the scaffolded plugin.json includes `%VERSION%` I'm guessing it gets updated, but I'm not sure what is responsible for that?

Author: ah! my bad I was responding in a different context. THe users don't have to update their plugin.json because of the variable you mention. I was thinking on the other instructions on how to do all this process manually.

> This will make sure to update your version in the `package.json` file and create a new git tag with the format `vX.X.X`. You can change the word `patch` to `minor` or `major` if you want to create a new minor or major version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This updates your version in the `package.json` file and creates a new Git tag with the format `vX.X.X`. You can change `patch` to `minor` or `major` if you want to create a new minor or major version.
```

After creating the tag, push it to the repository:

```bash

> git push origin main --tags

Reviewer 3: I might be wrong but I believe `--follow-tags` is the preferred approach when pushing tags as it only sends up tags that are annotated, don't already exist on the remote and relate to branches that exist remotely.

> `--follow-tags` Push all the refs that would be pushed without this option, and also push annotated tags in refs/tags that are missing from the remote but are pointing at committish that are reachable from the refs being pushed.

> `--tags` All refs under refs/tags are pushed, in addition to refspecs explicitly listed on the command line.

> Once you have created the tag, you can push it to the repository:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After creating the tag, push it to the repository:
```

```

<details>

>   <summary>Alternatively, create a `vX.X.X` tag manually</summary>

Reviewer 3: nit: do we need these instructions? There's missing instructions here to change the version in package.json. The package manager cli commands make this much easier to keep in sync.

Author: I don't think we need them and that's why I put them under details. I'll remove them

### Create a `vX.X.X` tag manually

If you prefer, you can also create the tag manually using the following commands:

```BASH
git checkout main
git pull origin main
git tag v2.0.1 # adjust the version accordingly

> git push origin main --tags

Reviewer 3: See previous note about `--tags` arg.

```

### Retag a release

If you need to re-tag the release, the current tag can be removed with these commands:

```BASH
git tag -d v2.0.1 # adjust the version accordingly
git push --delete origin v2.0.1
git checkout main
git pull origin main
```

After you push the tag, you can create the same tag again.

Once you have created the tag, you can push it to the repository:

```bash
# assuming your default branch is `main`

> git push origin main --tags

Reviewer 3: See previous note about --tags arg.

```

</details>

## Publish your release in Github

> Once you have [created the tag and pushed it](#how-to-trigger-the-release-workflow) the release workflow will run and create a release for you with all the artifacts you need to submit your plugin to the [Grafana plugin catalog](https://grafana.com/plugins).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you [create and push the tag](#how-to-trigger-the-release-workflow), the release workflow will run, generating a release with all the artifacts needed to submit your plugin to the [Grafana plugin catalog](https://grafana.com/plugins).
```

> The workflow creates draft releases. You can edit the release in GitHub, update the description as needed, and then publish it. For more details on managing repository releases, refer to the [GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow creates a **draft release**. You can edit the release in GitHub, update the description as needed, and then publish it. For more details on managing repository releases, refer to the [GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository).
```
I feel like its important to indicate it is draft. Also should we advise on making it a true release _after_ you have received feedback from the review?

Reviewer: @academo any thoughts on:
> Also should we advise on making it a true release after you have received feedback from the review?

Author: @sympatheticmoose in the docs we mention `Once the draft release is published, you can use the release assets to submit your plugin to the [Grafana plugin catalog](https://grafana.com/plugins). Simply copy the links to the archive (zip) file and sha1 sum. Use these in the plugin submission form.`

I want to propose we start creating published releases in the automation, since you have to commit a tag of a version to get the automation to trigger,. there's clear intention that you want to publish the release.

> The workflow creates draft releases, you can edit the release in Github, edit the description as needed and then publish the release. You can see the [github documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository) on how to manage your repository releases for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The workflow creates draft releases. You can edit the release in GitHub, update the description as needed, and then publish it. For more details on managing repository releases, refer to the [GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository).
```

## Use your release assets for your plugin submission

> Once the release is published, you can use the release assets to submit your plugin to the [Grafana plugin catalog](https://grafana.com/plugins). Simply copy the links to the archive (zip) file and sha1 sum. Use these in the plugin submission form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the draft release is published, you can use the release assets to submit your plugin to the [Grafana plugin catalog](https://grafana.com/plugins). Simply copy the links to the archive (zip) file and sha1 sum. Use these in the plugin submission form.
```

I think?

## Download the release zip file

> Access the final release zip file directly from the GitHub repository release path (for example, `https://github.com/org/plugin-id/releases`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access the release zip file directly from the GitHub repository release path (for example, `https://github.com/org/plugin-id/releases`).
```

Related to draft release suggestions

> ## Signing your plugin automatically

Author: I agree. but this redundancy is for people who is looking for this exact information (internet search) or for us to link people to it directly.

> You can sign your releases using the Github Action. First you will have to [Generate an Access Policy Token](./sign-a-plugin.md#generate-an-access-policy-token) and [save it in your repository secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-for-github-actions/security-guides/using-secrets-in-github-actions#creating-secrets-for-a-repository).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can sign your plugin releases using the Github Action. First you will have to [Generate an Access Policy Token](./sign-a-plugin.md#generate-an-access-policy-token) and [save it in your repository secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-for-github-actions/security-guides/using-secrets-in-github-actions#creating-secrets-for-a-repository).
```

remove ambiguity as to what you're signing

> We advice you to save your Access Policy Token as `GRAFANA_ACCESS_POLICY_TOKEN`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We advise you to save your Access Policy Token as `GRAFANA_ACCESS_POLICY_TOKEN`.
```

> We advice you to save your Access Policy Token as `GRAFANA_ACCESS_POLICY_TOKEN`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We advise you to save your Access Policy Token as `GRAFANA_ACCESS_POLICY_TOKEN`.
```

> Ensure your workflow release (refer to [Set up the release workflow](#setup-the-release-workflow)) has the `policy_token` line uncommented and is using the correct secret name. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure your [release workflow]( #setup-the-release-workflow) has the `policy_token` line uncommented and is using the correct secret name. For example:
```

Maybe reads a bit cleaner

> Make sure your workflow release (see [Setup the release workflow](#setup-the-release-workflow)) has the `policy_token` line uncommented and it is using the correct secret name. e.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure your workflow release (refer to [Set up the release workflow](#setup-the-release-workflow)) has the `policy_token` line uncommented and is using the correct secret name. For example:
```

```yaml title=".github/workflows/release.yml"
name: Release

on:
  push:
    tags:
      - 'v*' # Run workflow on version tags, e.g. v1.0.0.

jobs:
  release:
    permissions:
      id-token: write
      contents: write
      attestations: write
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - uses: grafana/plugin-actions/build-plugin@main
        with:
          # see https://grafana.com/developers/plugin-tools/publish-a-plugin/sign-a-plugin#generate-an-access-policy-token to generate it
          # save the value in your repository secrets
          policy_token: ${{ secrets.GRAFANA_ACCESS_POLICY_TOKEN }}
          attestation: true
```

> Then you can follow the regular process to [trigger](#how-to-trigger-the-release-workflow) the release workflow. Your plugin will be signed automatically and you can use the release assets for your plugin submission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, follow the regular process to [trigger](#how-to-trigger-the-release-workflow) the release workflow. Your plugin will be signed automatically, and you can use the release assets for your plugin submission.
```
